Ethical Design Statement
1. Privacy (Location and Data Handling)
The information handled by UniRide is sensitive: university email addresses of students, points of ride pickup, chat messages, and booking activities. The design focuses on data minimization, controlled access to data, and clear boundaries among components.
Minimum data collection: It stores only the essential data: email, details of rides, ratings, etc.. No Real-time GPS tracking is collected; pickup points are added manually.
Communication: In-app chat messages are only visible to the two parties involved
User control: Riders can cancel bookings and remove themselves from rides anytime, reducing irrelevant or unnecessary sharing of personal information.

2. Fairness (Ride Matching Algorithm)
Although recommended rides are shown at the top, all rides are shown to any given rider to give the rider full control over their choice.
No discrimination: Riders are not shown potential drivers based on age, race, gender, etc.
Objective selection criteria: Drivers are shown to riders only based on the relevant criteria, such as location, distance, time, etc.

3. Safety (Emergency features)
Safety is an ethical requirement of primary importance because the application entails physical transportation.
Student verification: Only verified students signing up with a student email will be allowed to use the service.
Clear ride details: Before a rider books a ride, they are shown all the relevant ride details.
In-app communication: Allows drivers and riders to easily communicate without needing to share personal information.
Live updates: Let riders and drivers know of any changes to a past booking as soon as they happen.

4. Ethical Trade-Off (Convenience vs. Privacy)
A major design decision is how to balance privacy with convenience. More convenience typically means less privacy, and more privacy typically means less convenience. Finding a good balance between these two extremes is key.
Increased privacy typically restricts data collection and negatively impacts matching precision or automation.
Instead of tracking user location, the system uses pre-determined pickup points. This keeps user privacy high, but does slightly reduce the capability of the system in offering the best possible recommendations. This trade-off strengthens user trust and ensures adherence to ethical expectations in student settings.
